README.md, before:

[![Discuss at #website:ansible.com on Matrix](https://img.shields.io/matrix/website:ansible.com.svg?server_fqdn=ansible-accounts.ems.host&label=Discuss%20at%20%23website:ansible.com&logo=matrix)](https://matrix.to/#/#website:ansible.com)

This repository contains the assets required to build the Ansible Community website. Welcome!

See the WIP site at [https://ansible-community-website.readthedocs.io/](https://ansible-community-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

## Contributing to the website

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Governance

Please see [Governance](CONTRIBUTING.md#Governance)

## Contacting the maintainers

The Website Working group can be found in [Ansible Website WG](https://matrix.to/#/#website:ansible.com) on Matrix
or ``#ansible-website`` on IRC. Alternatively, a GitHub issue is also acceptable for asking
questions.

## Building the website locally

The Ansible community website is static HTML generated from this repository.
You can build the website locally if you want to evaluate changes or experiment.

### Setting things up

We recommend that you use a Python virtual environment.

    # Create a virtual environment named "venv" in your current directory.
    python3 -m venv venv

    # Activate the virtual environment.
    source venv/bin/activate

    # Install the required packages.
    python -m pip install --upgrade -r ./requirements.in -c ./requirements.txt

### Building and viewing the site

The Ansible community website is built with [Nikola](https://getnikola.com/).

    # Build the site with Nikola.
    nikola build

    # View the site in your browser.
    nikola serve -b

    # List available commands.
    nikola help

> Check the [Nikola handbook](https://getnikola.com/handbook.html) for more details.

> Nikola configuration for the website is in ``conf.py``.

## Code of Conduct

The Ansible community team values diverse opinions and is committed to an inclusive
Please review and abide by our [CODE OF CONDUCT](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

[![License: CC BY-SA 4.0](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-sa/4.0/80x15.png)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

## Thank you

Ansible depends on community involvement - thank you for being a part of it!

Commit message:

Template linter and formatter (#153)
* issue #151 template lint and format

* format tmpl files

README.md, after:

[![Discuss at #website:ansible.com on Matrix](https://img.shields.io/matrix/website:ansible.com.svg?server_fqdn=ansible-accounts.ems.host&label=Discuss%20at%20%23website:ansible.com&logo=matrix)](https://matrix.to/#/#website:ansible.com)

This repository contains the assets required to build the Ansible Community website. Welcome!

See the WIP site at [https://ansible-community-website.readthedocs.io/](https://ansible-community-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

## Contributing to the website

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Governance

Please see [Governance](CONTRIBUTING.md#Governance)

## Contacting the maintainers

The Website Working group can be found in [Ansible Website WG](https://matrix.to/#/#website:ansible.com) on Matrix
or ``#ansible-website`` on IRC. Alternatively, a GitHub issue is also acceptable for asking
questions.

## Building the website locally

The Ansible community website is static HTML generated from this repository.
You can build the website locally if you want to evaluate changes or experiment.

### Setting things up

We recommend that you use a Python virtual environment.

    # Create a virtual environment named "venv" in your current directory.
    python3 -m venv venv

    # Activate the virtual environment.
    source venv/bin/activate

    # Install the required packages.
    python -m pip install --upgrade -r ./requirements.in -c ./requirements.txt

### Building and viewing the site

The Ansible community website is built with [Nikola](https://getnikola.com/).

    # Build the site with Nikola.
    nikola build

    # View the site in your browser.
    nikola serve -b

    # List available commands.
    nikola help

> Check the [Nikola handbook](https://getnikola.com/handbook.html) for more details.

> Nikola configuration for the website is in ``conf.py``.

## Checking and formatting templates

This project includes tooling that checks each Pull Request for issues with the website templates.
If you modify the templates you should check and format them prior to submitting a PR.

    # Check templates for issues.
    nox -s lint

    # Check templates and ignore rules.
    nox -s lint -- --ignore=H006,H013,T002,T003,T028

    # Check changes before formatting.
    nox -s format -- --check

    # Format templates.
    nox -s format

Default configuration for the linter and formatter is in the ``[tool.djlint]`` section of ``pyproject.toml``.
For more information about configuration options, see:

- [Linter](https://www.djlint.com/docs/linter/)
- [Formatter](https://www.djlint.com/docs/formatter/)

## Code of Conduct

The Ansible community team values diverse opinions and is committed to an inclusive
Please review and abide by our [CODE OF CONDUCT](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

[![License: CC BY-SA 4.0](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-sa/4.0/80x15.png)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

## Thank you

Ansible depends on community involvement - thank you for being a part of it!
